--- 
wordpress_id: 458
author_login: bryanlarsen
layout: post
comments: []

author: Bryan Larsen
title: 2.0.0.pre6
published: true
tags: []

date: 2012-11-15 15:25:12 +00:00
categories: 
- General
author_email: bryan@larsen.st
wordpress_url: http://hobocentral.net/blog/?p=458
author_url: http://bryan.larsen.st
status: publish
---
I'm pleased to announce the availability of Hobo 2.0.0.pre6.

There are two changes that may affect your existing code.

## hobo-jquery-ui optional

As of 2.0.0.pre6, hobo-jquery-ui is now optional.  I'll explain in a subsequent blog post how you can take advantage of this, but most of you will want to continue to use hobo-jquery-ui in your applications.

The hobo themes no longer list hobo-jquery-ui as an explicit dependency, so you must ensure that your Gemfile contains `gem "hobo_jquery_ui"`

## content vs content-body

In previous versions of Hobo, the page tag only defined the `content` parameter.  Generated pages created the `content-header`, `content-body` and `aside` parameters inside of page's content parameter.

Now `content`, `content-header`, `content-body` and `aside` are all defined by the page tag of the theme you are using.

This is unlikely to affect you unless you are using the `hobo_bootstrap` theme.   If you are using `hobo_bootstrap`, please ensure that you are using at least version 2.0.0.pre6 of `hobo_bootstrap`.

## minor changes

`live-search` was reorganized to make it easier for themes to adjust
the look and feel.  You can take advantage of this change by
installing the new [hobo\_bootstrap\_ui](http://cookbook.hobocentral.net/api_plugins/hobo_bootstrap_ui).

## bug fixes

- routing.  This most likely exhibited as links not having a target in 2.0.0.pre5.
- click-editor
- name-one
- nested input-many
- IE8 & Safari/iOS fixes
- documentation

For more detail, see the github code history and closed issues list.
